.. rst-class:: style5 big

************
Introduction
************

A few years ago, I decided to play some old-school dungeon crawlers that I had
missed out on as a kid, so I started looking for a software tool to replace
traditional pencil-and-paper mapping. Unfortunately, none of the readily
available solutions were to my liking.  Spreadsheet applications (a popular
choice among many cRPG enthusiasts) are too fiddly and slow to work with, and
the dungeon mapping tools I could find were either overcomplicated, too
bare-bones, unattractive, or just didn't have the type of keyboard-driven
interface I was looking for.

And that last point is the critical one. A grid-based cRPG with say ten 32Ã—32
dungeons has 10,240 cells in total. Supposing only 30--50% of those are cells
that you can actually visit, that's still three to five thousand little
squares to map during the course of a single playthrough. You can easily spend
20--40 hours to complete a classic cRPG, and often much longer! Because of
this, it's reasonable to expect the same level of efficiency and ergonomics
from any dungeon mapping tool that one would from any professional editing
software.

When designing Gridmonger, my main goal was to make map creation an as
efficient and enjoyable experience as possible. The basic idea was simple:
most classic cRPGs are keyboard-driven, therefore mapping them has to be
keyboard-driven as well. Ideally, you would not even have to lift your fingers
from the keyboard while simultaneously playing and mapping the game!

Let me stress this again: Gridmonger is meant to be used *while playing the
game*. While other programs might bedazzle you with a large variety of
features, Gridmonger's scope is purposefully kept small and focused. It aims
to do one thing, and do it exceedingly well:

.. rst-class:: quote

*Be the ultimate keyboard-driven grid-based cRPG mapping companion!*

I do hope you will have as much fun mongering grids with the program as I had
developing it!


.. raw:: html

    <div class="figure">
      <a href="_static/img/eob-full.png" class="glightbox">
        <img alt="Proper use of Gridmonger &mdash; playing and mapping Eye of the Beholder I" src="_static/img/eob-full.png">
      </a>
        <p class="caption">
          <span>Proper use of Gridmonger &mdash; playing and mapping <a class="reference external" href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eye_of_the_Beholder_(video_game)">Eye of the Beholder I</a></span>
        </p>
    </div>


